It occurred to me that there is no children's book on nightmares.

From the age of 8 and 10, I had terrifying nightmares. They went away as I got older. but before then I had to learn how to control them somewhat. There should have been a book that taught me those methods.

This is the book of nightmares.

A recurring dream from when I was 8: I am on vacation with my parents, we're staying in a campsite, by the river in a beatutiful gorge. Our tents are under an enormous bridge that connects the mountains on both shores. I go for a swim usptream and as get ready return to our tent, I notice a large swarm of swans flying under then bridge. That is unusual, swans don't normally do that. I feel very worried that something is wrong. I rush back to the tent to find that my parents and my brother have been eaten by the swans.

A recurring dream from when I was 10. I am being chased by my classmates, who have come to my house to beat me up. They have brought pitchforks, sticks, a baseball bat with 6 inch nail hammered through it. If I can run fast enough, I can make it to the pond in our backyard on time, where there is a birch tree that gives me the ability to fly. It will take a few agonizing seconds to get liftoff, but as they jumpt to grab my legs, like snarling dogs, I break free, circle around the brich and make my way to the towering pines in our neighbour's backyard. Once I reach the crown of the pines, I am free, and I can fly over our village like an eagle. Nothing can get me now. 

A dream from when I was older: I am standing in the middle of a river that turns to blood. The landscape is engulfed in flames. Everything is on fire. The air is hot with ashes and embers. It is impossible to breathe. A moose rises from the bloody river and lifts its head. I has lost its fur ands skin. I see the bloody muscle, tendons and bone. It speaks to me and asks: "Why did you do this?" I know I need to get the bears to help me. Somehow, they know something I do not yet know. 

I have not studied for an exam. The exam is stupid. It does not speak. I turn to the exam, and say: "What do you want? Why are you here? I don't owe you anything. Go away!" 

He is aware that his heart is beating faster. Although his arms and legs do not move, he is gripped with the thought that he is running as fast as he can to escape a fox. Just when he fears the fox will catch him, the dream ends. [Mutter](https://dulwichcentre.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Re-storying-childrens-nightmares-and-night-terrors-by-Kelvin-F-Mutter-1.pdf)

I am at the playground at our housing complex and a scary man tries to grab me. I try to run away but he blocks me. I look for a hiding place but there is nowhere to hide. I try to call for help but no-one hears me. I scream.
[Mutter](https://dulwichcentre.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Re-storying-childrens-nightmares-and-night-terrors-by-Kelvin-F-Mutter-1.pdf)

I loose my balance and fall backwards. I wake up before I hit the ground.


# 
Keran Schneider has a point when she says: "Without writing something myself, I wouldn't even know what I wanted to say."
